# Compiler 
**Goal**
- Remove unused front-end code, like C++, ObjC to make it simplify
- Create an AST for C code.
  - To compare my compiler
- Print debug messages while compiling phases
- Make `clang` to be specify for only C language for beginners.

**TODO**
- More optimized compiling `clang`

## Building clang on MacOS and Linux(Debian)
### How to build
- git clone "llvm-project"
- Then, build it by using `CMake` & `Make`

```bash
$ mkdir build && cd build
$ cmake -DLLVM_ENABLE_PROJECTS=clang -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=RelWithDebInfo -DLLVM_TARGETS_TO_BUILD="ARM;X86" -G "Unix Makefiles" ../llvm
$ make -j $(nproc)  # for linux
$ make -j $(sysctl -n hw.ncpu)   # for MacOS
```

### Common Errors that I have faced
```
collect2: fatal error: ld terminated with signal 9 [Killed]
```
the linker (ld) was killed by the system, most likely due to `Out of Memory`

My Solution
- Use `Ninja` to more optimize building
- Use less cores while building
- Specify build targets.

First try to use `Ninja`
```
$ sudo apt install ninja-build

$ cmake -G Ninja -DLLVM_ENABLE_PROJECTS=clang -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=RelWithDebInfo ../llvm
$ ninja -j 8
```
**How to specify back-end codegen targets?**
- Define `LVM_TARGETS_TO_BUILD` options with `cmake`.

> LLVM_TARGETS_TO_BUILD:STRING
> 
> Semicolon-separated list of targets to build, or all for building all targets. Case-sensitive. Defaults to all. Example: -DLLVM_TARGETS_TO_BUILD="X86;PowerPC". The full list, as of March 2023, is: AArch64;AMDGPU;ARM;AVR;BPF;Hexagon;Lanai;LoongArch;Mips;MSP430;NVPTX;PowerPC;RISCV;Sparc;SystemZ;VE;WebAssembly;X86;XCore
>
> You can also specify host or Native to automatically detect and include the target corresponding to the host machine’s architecture, or use all to include all available targets. For example, on an x86_64 machine, specifying -DLLVM_TARGETS_TO_BUILD=host will include the X86 target.

**on MacOS vs on Linux**

My Macbook has 16G memory and Debian linux has 32G memory. However, when I use `make` with 16 cores, the compilation, more precisly the linking, was not failed on MacOS but not on Linux. What's the reason?? Was it optimized for clang more than gcc?

### Confirmation
output path would be `llvm/build/bin`(Add to `PATH` if you want)

```bash
$ ls bin | grep "clang"
```
---
Example C file: `main.c`
```c
#include <stdio.h>
int main() {
  printf("hello \n");
  return 0;
}
```
Run below command in the build directory
- for MacOS
```bash
$ bin/clang -isysroot $(xcrun --show-sdk-path) main.c 
```
- for Linux
```bash
```

**Warning on MacOS**

Note that, if you run `bin/clang` alone, the compilation will be failed because `clang` built by me doesn't know standard library paths. So we let `clang` know the paths.
```bash
$ xcrun --show-sdk-path
/Library/Developer/CommandLineTools/SDKs/MacOSX.sdk
```

> For debug the include paths accepted by `clang`
>
> $ clang -v main.c

-----
Example C++ file: `main.cc`
```c++
#include <iostream>
int main() {
  std::cout << "hello world" << std::endl;
  return 0;
}
```

Run below command in the build directory
- for MacOS
```bash
$ clang++ -isysroot $(xcrun --show-sdk-path) main.cc
```
Do not compile `main.cc` that is C++ code via `clang` but `clang++`.

- for Linux
```bash

```

## Cleaning jobs
- keep Actions, Lexer, Parser for only C.
  - Remove C++
  - Remove Object C
  - Remove code completion
  - Remove CIR(Not needed now, use ordinary IR in CodeGen)
- Not support precompiling
- Only works for front-end parts now.
- Check back-end module dependencies.
- Need ASTMater for AST debugging


## Prepare Common Lisp implementation
The lexer and the parser that are similar with `clang`

Example expression: `1+2`

- The lookahead method to manage tokens
  - next-token()
    - Return the next token(lookahead token)
  - current-token()
    - Return the current token?!
  - consume()
    - No return
    - just consume a token from the token stream.
      - should I implement the token stream?
  - cur-ptr
    - first, points to the token `1` that is a numeric constant 
- Implement a few functions
  - top-down parsing mechanism
  - parse-expression(expr)
  - parse-rhs-of-binary-expression(lhs)
- Define a simple AST for a binary expression